[AUDIO LOGO]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What is love?
>> Mm.
>> [LAUGHING] What is love?
>> What is love?
This is-- This is about
as good as it gets.
[LAUGHING]
And it seems to get
better as we get older,
but there'll probably
be a tipping point,
where we don't know
what's going to happen.
And we'll just have to be
willing to kind of slide
together down some
slippery slope.
>> [LAUGHING]
>> When we got married, we
worked out a series of vows,
which we wrote out, and
we said to each other--
I can't really remember
what they were, except
that it was something like that
we hope one day we will sit here
in our old age, still
together, and just
enjoy this life that we've
been given, you know.
>> Maybe we do need to renew our
vows so that we remember what we
said.
But the one that stands
out quite strongly,
which I feel we're
embodying now, is,
"May our home be a place where
people can accept themselves,"
which was-- when
we drew that up,
it was a beautiful intention.
And I feel like we're
really living that.
The other was that we don't
hide behind each other,
that we have our own
identity and our own one--
one with ourselves, that we're
not hiding behind another person
or expecting them to fulfill
what is important to us.
What is often hard to
accept, when you live so much
inside yourself, is that
the person in front of you
is very different to you.
I think in a marriage, that's
the hardest just thing--
to realize that some of the
differences that you fell
in love with in
the beginning are
the things that bug you later.
[LAUGHS] I've seen that
in myself and with others.
So it's really those are
the little daily things that
need to be communicated and
set down and made a compromise.
Thank you.
>> I see that if I leave the
butter out after I make toast,
that my wife is furious--
>> [LAUGHING]
>> --daily.
Then I think the one way
I can show a commitment
to the relationship is to either
not have toast at all [LAUGHS]
or to have toast without butter
or to put the butter away.
And I don't have to
talk to her about it.
I don't have to be
analytical about it.
I just-- one--
one picks it up.
And, of course, there are things
I do that will infuriate her
that I don't pick up.
She'll tell me.
She's not scared
of me in that way.
>> [LAUGHING]
>> If I look back, there are
stages in a married life.
There's the initial
excitement of being together,
and then, of course, the utter
astonishment of having children.
That-- that was just--
it was just wonderful, beyond--
beyond measure.
Sometimes it was
really hard work.
We had to earn a living.
I had to travel to work.
There was times we
had to be apart,
times where we came together.
And we didn't resist
it or complain.
We just did it.
And in retrospect,
that doing of it
was a wonderful kind of
cementing of the relationship.
Since then, I've
stopped traveling.
We spend all our time
together now, pretty much.
We sleep together.
We eat together.
We drink together.
And it's wonderful.
And there's a whole new
adjustment that happens.
And I think that's
really precious,
and people talk about,
oh, it's difficult
when your children leave home.
Of course, they have
left home long ago.
But for us, it's been wonderful.
We've had time on our own,
and we make as much use of it
as we can.
>> I think it's very
important to find something,
when your children leave home,
that the two of you do together
that is meaningful and
nourishing to both of you.
When I look around at my
family and my friends,
that's often when couples
go different ways.
Then one feels that you're
living two separate lives,
and it's very difficult to
find a place of connection
because your priorities have
been work or children or both.
And now, none of
those are something
that you share anymore.
>> I never give advice because
it's always going to be,
I wouldn't take it anyway.
But for us, what's really
helped was having, as Margie
says, not only a common
direction in our life,
but a sense that we actually
deliberately do things together
that are meaningful to us.
Every night, we
gather around sunset,
and we watch the sun go down.
In a sense, ritual, in that way,
was always a part of our life.
So we always have
watched the sun go down.
It was always important for us.
And when the children were
younger, they would join us.
And now that they're not
here, we sit together,
and we talk about
them all the time.
[LAUGHING]
>> Not all the time, though.
>> But it's quite a deliberate,
ritualized part of the day.
So we make it precious.
I think that's
what we try and do.
And it does become precious, not
so much because we, as it were,
set out to make
something precious,
but we decided
what-- how we wanted
to spend that time together.
And it turned out to be
precious, which is wonderful.
Yeah.
I feel quite strongly,
growing older, that
however much I look back to a
more romantic postcard version
of what life could
be, that something
fantastically, wonderfully
ordinary has taken its place.
>> Ordinary is extraordinary.
If you think of your life,
it's the little things,
the ordinary little things
that are very meaningful,
and you don't forget them.
Little kindnesses,
little actions
that you don't expect to
happen are the ordinary.
And I think one of the
most ordinary things
that we humans are made to do
is to be present and listen
to each other.
And I think it's
only when we stop
that we see the extraordinary
in the ordinary, when we really
stop and feel and hear.
Yeah.
>> In the same way that the
leaves change in spring and fall
and autumn, and that certain
birds appear at certain times
of the year, and the sun
comes and the wind goes,
all of that is part of my life.
And she is absolutely,
intimately as much a part of it
as all of that.
I live in the felt and my wife.
That's how it feels.
And I--
>> I'm so pleased.
>> I'd like to think, you
know, that she feels something
of the same.
There's a sense of
almost the inevitability
of looking around and
finding you here next to me,
in the same way that I lift
the blind in the morning
and see the sun come up.
That--
>> That's nothing.
>> --has been a discovery for
me that I did not anticipate.
And I wish it for everybody.
And I think if one
gives oneself a chance,
it'll appear all by itself.
If I look over one day
and she's not there,
it'll be heartbreaking.
That's absolutely true.
I will then, as best
I can, honor the life
that we've had together.
She is my life, and
my life will continue.
My-- saying she
is my life doesn't
mean that I have no
life without her.
Saying she is my life means
that when she's with me, it's--
it's full of her.
It means that when she
dies, and I'm still around,
that my life will consist of
whatever there is around me
and that my--
almost my duty to her
would be to live that life
as best as I can.
As she mentioned, we undertook
not to hide behind each other,
that I only live through you.
I live through you, but
that's just the beginning.
It's not the end so that
when you die, I'll weep.
I'll build you a fantastic
grave overlooking the copies,
and we'll have sirens and choirs
of angels all over the place.
>> [LAUGHING]
>> And then, I'll play
music with the angels.
That's how it feels to me.
And I'm not looking
forward to it.
>> It sounds like you
are-- the choir of angels.
Shall I bring them on now?
>> I think the way I would honor
her would be to get on with
the life that is left for me.
That's what she would wish
for me more than anything.
She would want me to see the sun
come up, to dig in the garden,
to look after visitors, to
make the bed properly at last.
>> [LAUGHING]
>> But I think that she would
trust me that however sad it
was, that sadness would become
my life and would be manure
for whatever last days are left,
which are probably not going
to be very many, you know.
But that would be a
huge event for me.
I've got a little poem that
I'd like to recite, if I may.
I'll try and remember it.
I shaved my head for the
children of Palestine.
I swept up the leaves
in the Jewish cemetery.
My wife wrapped presents
for the old ladies
in the frail care home.
My daughter washed the
dishes after lunch.
The Buddha of compassion
has 84,000 hands.
Which of those are yours?